ABSTRACT
Background: Globally, Acne Vulgaris is a widespread, chronic inflammatory condition of the pilosebaceous follicles. Acne is not fatal, but depending on its severity, it can leave the sufferer with scars, irritation, and significant psychological effects (including depression). In the current review, we have included various factors for
acne and their treatment explained. It also narrated the current medicament and the new investigation dosage
forms with clinical phases information provided.
Main body of the abstract: Acne’s pathophysiology involves four important factors: excessive sebum production,
hyperkeratinization of pilosebaceous follicles, hyperproliferation of propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes), and
inflammation. Identifying both inflammatory (Papule, pustule, nodule, and cyst) and non-inflammatory (black
heads, white heads) acne lesions is necessary for diagnosing and treating acne vulgaris.
Short conclusion: In this review, traditional therapy approaches such as topical (i.e., retinoids and antibiotics),
systemic (i.e., retinoids, antibiotics, and hormonal), and physical therapies are briefly discussed. In addition, we
highlight the issues posed by P. acne’s resistance to the antibiotics used in commercially available medications
and the necessity for novel therapeutic techniques. Finally, we examined a few innovative acne therapies
pending clinical trial approval and commercial acne medications. 

1. Background
Acne (also known as Acne Vulgaris) is a persistent chronic skin inflammatory condition of the pilosebaceous follicles that affects people
all over the world [1–3]. Acne is projected to affect 9.4 % of the global
population, ranking it eighth among skin diseases. Acne affects more
than 85 % of teenagers, and the disease can persist into adulthood which
often occurs in females and accounts for two-thirds of dermatologist
consultations for acne [4]. The unique lesions can be characterised as
either non-inflammatory (open/black and closed/white comedones) or
inflammatory (papules, pustules, nodules, and cysts), leading to scar
development and pigmentation on the skin, necessitating prolonged and
persistent therapy [5]. Typically, lesions are observed on the face, neck,
upper back, and chest. There are several forms of acne, such as neonatal
and infantile acne, occupational acne, acne conglobata, acne fulminans,
acne mechanica, excoriated acne, chloracne, and acne induced by drugs
(caused, for example, by anabolic steroids, corticosteroids, isoniazid,
lithium, and phenytoin). These variations resemble acne vulgaris clinically and histologically, but the clinical situation, severity can distinguish them, and accompanying symptoms [6]. Acne can’t be stopped
from occurring or cured, but it can be treated quite successfully.
Moreover, acne is also connected with significant financial expenses.
It is noteworthy that the number of research papers and scientific
findings relevant to acne treatment regimens continues to increase,
given the enormous interest in various research breakthroughs in this
area. Much study has been conducted on acne, both in terms of the
disease process and the numerous therapy approaches. The most recent
advances in acne therapy involve the use of combination treatments that
address the numerous pathogenic factors that are at the root of the
condition. The most recent literature on acne treatment, which
described several topical applications, novel treatments, and emerging
treatments for successful acne-targeted therapy, includes topical 
retinoids that normalize abnormal hyperkeratinization in the infundibulum and novel topical retinoids with anti-inflammatory properties
[7–10]. The present article aims to give a clear picture of acne types,
their pathogenesis, and biological pathways of various acne types and
also discusses conventional treatment medication strategies in detail.
The novelty of the current review highlighted the information from
recent research and review along with in detailed description of the
treatment combination. We also highlighted the dosage forms which are
in various trial phases, along with successful and commercially available
dosage forms in the market. Besides, we will review the recent developments and discuss some potential clinical trial studies in detail.

2. Main text
2.1. Factors contributing to acne pathogenies and types of acne
The following elements are thought to be relevant in the classical
aetiology of acne vulgaris (see Fig. 1). Genetics, environmental variables
(temperature, pollution, humidity, sun exposure, mineral oils/halogenated hydrocarbons), nutrition, hormonal state, stress, smoking, comedogenic medicines such as androgens, halogens, corticosteroids,
bacteria, and cosmetics [7] may cause, worsen, or exacerbate acne [8,
11]. Acne Vulgaris (AV) typically causes discomfort, emotional
suffering, deformity, and possibly permanent scars. In addition to this,
patients may have feelings of anxiety and embarrassment, both of which
contribute to a mentally depressed state.
Due to the aforementioned exposome factors, the pathogenesis of
acne is multifactorial, which involves the excess production of sebum,
hyper proliferation of the bacteria colonization known as cutibacterium
acnes (previously known as propionibacterium acnes), abnormal
hyperkeratinization of the pilosebaceous follicles, and inflammatory
mechanisms are the four primary causes for acne [12]. The next section
will describe the various causative factors and pathogenesis (see Fig. 1).
2.2. Causative factors and pathogenesis of acne vulgaris
Several causal factors are believed to play a key part in the traditional aetiology of acne vulgaris. As discussed previously, chronic acne
skin diseases are caused by increased sebum excretion rates, endocrinological factors such as androgens, aberrant keratinization of the
follicular infundibulum, bacterial infection proliferation, and consequent inflammation (see Fig. 1).
a) Increase in Sebum production: An increase in sebum production in
the hair follicles is one of the most significant causes of acne 
formation. According to Gollnick et al. androgen hormones, specifically testosterone and Insulin Growth hormone (IGH-1), increase
sebum synthesis and secretion [13]. There is a clear correlation between increased sebum production and the severity and frequency of
acne lesions; as a result, it is a significant element that should be
considered in patients suffering from acne vulgaris [14–16].
b) Hyperkeratinization abnormalities of the pilosebaceous follicles:
Generally, the healthy follicles often shed single-cell keratinocytes
into the lumen, which are then ultimately eliminated. However, in
acne patients, keratinocytes hyper proliferate and are not shed into
the lumen, which leads to the accumulation of irregular desquamated corneocytes in the pilosebaceous follicles coupled with lipids
and monofilaments [17–19].
c) Hyper proliferation of propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes): Propionibacterium, which plays a substantial part in the pathophysiology of inflammatory acne, is an additional acne-causing agent.
Cutibacterium acnes, formerly known as propionibacterium acnes, is
an anaerobic, lipophilic, gram-positive pathogen that prefers to
colonise in sebaceous follicles because they produce large amounts of
sebum and provide excellent anaerobic habitat for bacterial growth
[20]. P. acnes secretes a lipase enzyme that metabolizes the triglycerides of sebum into glycerol and fatty acids, which can lead to
the formation of comedones and inflammation on the skin [21].
d) Inflammation acne: On continuation to the above P. acne process,
when the immune system detects P. acnes, the inflammatory process
begins. P. acnes has a strong inflammatory effect, which may produce chemostatic agents like lymphocytes, neutrophils, and macrophages. In addition, these conditions cause follicular damage,
rupture, and the release of germs, fatty acids, and lipids into the
dermis layer. These mechanistic processes will produce inflammatory lesions such as ulcers (pustules, nodules, cysts and papules).
Non-inflammatory lesions are smaller and less pus-filled than inflammatory lesions [22,23]. In addition, it was discovered that
neutrophils produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), which damage
the follicular epithelium and contribute to acne inflammation. This
causes the follicular substances to be expelled into the dermis,
resulting in a variety of inflammatory acne lesions [24].
e) DNA Methylation: Under environmental stress, epigenetic modification, which represents the intersection of genetics and the environment, can alter the expression of genes. DNA methylation, one of
the well-studied forms of epigenetic modification, is gaining
increasing attention in the field of dermatology for its function in the
mechanisms of inflammatory, autoimmune, and cancerous skin diseases. DNA methylation has been shown to play a role in the pathogenesis and progression of inflammatory skin diseases such as 
hidradenitis suppurativa, atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, and other inflammatory skin disorders. Epigenetics plays a significant role in the
development of acne vulgaris and may offer insights into its molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic approaches [25].
2.3. Types of acne lesions
Acne is classified into several forms, including acne conglobate, acne
rosacea, acne fulminans, acne cosmetica, acne excoriee (picker’s acne),
acne medicamentosa, acne chloracne, and acne mechanica [26,27].
Nonetheless, acne vulgaris is the most prevalent form of acne, accounting for 99% of all acne cases. It is differentiated by two types of
lesions: non-inflammatory, open and closed comedones, as well as inflammatory papules, pustules, nodules, and cysts (see Fig. 2). The
comedones are of two types: a comedo that is closed is a whitehead,
while another that is open is a blackhead type [28].
Blackheads: Blackheads are non-inflammatory acne lesions that
develop on the skin due to excess oil and dead skin cells obstructing hair
shafts. A blackhead is referred to as an open comedo because the skin
surface remains exposed and has a dark look, such as black or brown.
Blackheads are mild acne that usually appears on the face, arms, chest,
neck, back and shoulders.
Whiteheads: Whiteheads are small bumps and non-inflammatory
acne lesion that develops on the skin when oil, bacteria and skin cells
block the opening of hair follicle pores. Whiteheads are referred to as
closed comedones since the bumps are closed and white. Whiteheads
can develop anywhere on the body, but they are most frequent in the Tzone, which includes the nose, chin, and forehead.
Papules: Inflammation is the response of healthy skin tissue to
bacteria, excess oil production, and excess androgen activity, and its
symptoms include swelling, heat, redness, and pain. These inflamed
lesions are known as papules and are considered an intermediary step
between non-inflammatory and inflammatory lesions (see Fig. 2). Papules show on the skin as a little pink lump typically less than 5 mm in
diameter and not pus-filled.
Pustules: Pustules are small bumps and an inflammatory lesion that
occurs on the skin by clogging the pores with excess oil and dead skin
cells. Pustules are inflammatory lesions that contain fluid or pus in their
centre. Often, they manifest as white pimples surrounded by red,
irritated skin. Pustules can form on any part of the body, although they
are most prevalent on the shoulders, chest, back, face, neck, underarms,
pubic region, and hairline.
Nodules: Acne nodules are a severe form of inflammatory acne that
develops when the pores become clogged by bacteria, excess oil and
dead skin cells. This type of combination usually causes whitehead or
blackhead comedones, but if the infection penetrates underneath the
surface of the skin and affects the pores as well as the surrounding area
to become red and swollen and appear as a small bump. Acne nodules
are not treatable with over-the-counter medications alone and might
remain for weeks or months. Nodular acne is similar to papule acne, but
its diameter is bigger than 5–10 mm, and it often develops on the face’s
jawline or chin.
Cysts: Cystic acne is a severe kind of inflammatory acne that appears
beneath the skin due to blocked pores caused by the accumulation of
bacteria, dry skin cells, and oil (see Fig. 2). People with the oily skin of
all ages are most affected. Cyst typically appears as large white/red
painful lesions filled with pus, sometimes leading to scars. Cystic acne
can appear anywhere on the body, although it most frequently affects
the face, arms, shoulders, back, chest, and neck. Most people with cystic
acne experience both inflammatory and non-inflammatory acne
symptoms.
2.3.1. Prevalence of acne
According to the Global Burden of Disease Study, acne vulgaris is the
eighth most common skin disease worldwide, with an estimated global
prevalence of 9.38 % for all age groups. The prevalence of acne varies
among different countries and age groups, with estimates ranging from
35 % to close to 100 % of adolescents experiencing acne at some point
[29]. According to Shah et al. the prevalence of adult acne was found to
be 0.74 % in their study on the clinico-epidemiological pattern of acne
vulgaris in adult patients. The high prevalence of acne in adults may be
attributed to increase reporting to healthcare facilities and improved
awareness. High glycemic diets may contribute to the high prevalence of
acne [30]. 

3. Conventional medications for acne treatment
Amongst the available treatment options for acne vulgaris primary 
objective is to manage and treat existing lesions by controlling the
sebum secretion, abnormal hyperkeratinization of the pilosebaceous
follicles and propionibacterium infection. As a result, the main treatment options for acne include anti-inflammatory drugs and antibacterial
drugs [14,31–33] administered either through topical or systemic or
oral route of administration and by physical way by using non-drug
treatments such as optical therapy, cryotherapy, comedone extraction,
cyroslush therapy and intralesional corticosteroids. On the other hand,
combinational treatment (topical and oral route) is more effective in
acne pathogenesis [14,31].
3.1. Topical treatments
Topical therapies have the advantage of being given topically to the
diseased area, hence minimising systemic absorption and increasing
pilosebaceous follicular unit exposure. Numerous formulations of
topical preparations include creams, gels, lotions, solutions, and washes.
Mild to moderate acne is typically treated with topical medicines [34,
35]. Besides retinoids, antibiotics are used topically to treat patients
suffering from acne. Skin irritation is a common side effect of topically
administered anti-acne medications. Topical treatment may last 6–8
weeks or continue for many years [36].
3.1.1. Retinoids
Topical retinoid therapy is the most used first-line treatment for noninflammatory and inflammatory acne [14,37]. The primary objective of
retinoids is to reduce sebum production, regulate the growth of comedones, rebuild the damaged epithelium layer, treat hyperpigmentation
and scarring, reduce the creation of acne lesions, and control the growth
of existing comedones. Nevertheless, this therapy is a lengthy procedure
that requires more than three months to cure acne. The disadvantages of
topical retinoids include dryness and skin irritation. Tretinoin, Adapalene, and Tazarotene are often used as retinoids for acne therapy.
a) Tretinoin: It is a vitamin A derivative form of a drug and possesses
anti-inflammatory properties. This medication is usually used in
conjugation with other retinoids in the acne vulgaris treatment to
normalize the epithelial layer, hence preventing the occlusion of
pilosebaceous units and reducing sebum production. It has been used
as a topical therapy for acne for over three decades. It is available in
the market as creams, gels, and ointment forms for acne treatment
[38]. When applied topically, the side effects are mild and cause sun
sensitivity and redness but cause headache, skin dryness, hair loss,
itching and muscle pains when consumed orally in Leukemia treatment [39].
b) Adapalene: Primarily used topical retinoid drug for treating mildmoderate acne patients. It has more advantages than other retinoids like Tretinoin and Tazarotene and is considered a first-line
therapy for acne treatment [40]. It helps to reduce the hyperkeratinization of pilosebaceous follicles, inflammation caused by
acne. The side effects are minimal such as redness, irritation, and
itching on the skin [41].
c) Tazarotene: It is one of the novel topical retinoids used for acne
vulgaris treatment. After tretinoin or adapalene treatments have
failed to produce results, tazarotene is considered a second-line
treatment. It helps to reduce hyperkeratinization and hyperproliferation of Propionibacterium Acnes in the epithelial layer of
acne patients [42,43]. Tazarotene is combined with benzoyl
peroxide or antibiotics for treating inflammatory acne as it also has
inflammatory properties; combinational therapy is more effective
than monotherapy, yet skin irritation and redness are the adverse
effects of Tazarotene [44].
3.1.2. Antibiotics
Topical antibiotics are generally used to treat mild to moderate inflammatory acne. They have anti-P. acnes activity and hence act on the
skin’s surface to diminish inflammatory lesions [45]. Due to their ineffectiveness and undesirable side effects, not all topical antibiotics
(chloramphenicol and tetracycline) are used to treat acne. Erythromycin
and clindamycin are the two most commonly used topical antibiotics for
treating acne. Using topical antibiotics with benzoyl peroxide and
topical retinoids to prevent bacterial resistance is a more effective
strategy than monotherapy [46]. When applied directly on the skin,
topical antibiotics reduce P. acnes colonization and inflammation in
acne patients [47]. Here are the few topically used antibiotics in acne
treatment are.
a) Erythromycin: It is a topical antibiotic used in treating acne patients.
Erythromycin, when administered topically on the skin, helps to
reduce the colonization of P. acnes in pilosebaceous follicles and
reduce inflammation. Researchers observed that erythromycin has
60 % bacterial resistance, which is less desirable and leads to the
creation of new topical antibiotics in the future.
b) Clindamycin: It is a semi-synthetic topical antibiotic used for treating acne patients. Clindamycin also has properties similar to erythromycin, inhibiting the P. acnes on the surface of the skin and
reducing inflammation. Topical antibiotics monotherapy should be
avoided for treating acne vulgaris and encourage combinational
treatment for better use.
3.1.3. Combinational topical treatments
Combinational topical therapy has many benefits compared to
monotherapy treatment. Other topical treatments used during combinational therapy for acne are benzoyl peroxide, salicylic acid, niacinamide, azelaic acid and dapsone.
a) Benzoyl Peroxide (BPO): Benzoyl Peroxide acts as a topical nonantibiotic disinfectant and also exhibits antibacterial properties,
which are used for treating mild to moderate acne [48]. BPO produces free oxygen, which helps in the degradation of bacterial proteins, hence proving the bactericidal action against P. acnes [47,49].
Initially, 6–8 weeks acne patients can be treated with BPO monotherapy, but for effective results, BPO is combined with topical antibiotics to minimize P. acne species resistance and promotes
therapeutic efficacy [50]. The most common BPO adverse effects are
itching, peeling, irritation and redness on the skin may occur [51,
52].
b) Salicylic acid: Salicylic acid is a beta hydroxyl compound that has
anti-inflammatory, fungistatic and bacteriostatic properties. It reduces acne by exfoliating the skin and keeping pores clear when
applied topically. However, salicylic acid is safe to use but sometimes
causes skin irritation, itching and dryness [53]. It is mainly used to
treat mild acne. Numerous over-the-counter drugs are available for
acne treatments, which majorly contain salicylic acid [54]. Supramolecular Salicylic Acid treatment significantly improved the acne
patients and modulates the microbial diversity of patients toward
like individuals with no facial acne [55].
c) Niacinamide: Niacinamide is a form of vitamin B3 called nicotinamide (composed of niacin/nicotinic acid). It treats acne patients to
lessen the sebum/oil secretion and shield the skin from developing
acne [56]. Niacinamide has anti-inflammatory properties and is used
to treat mild to moderate acne. It helps acne patients recover from
sun damage, fine lines, redness, and wrinkles. Due to its beneficial/therapeutic properties, niacinamide is used in acne medications
and other skincare products [57,58].
d) Azelaic acid: Azelaic acid is a naturally occurring substance derived
from barley and wheat with antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antikeratolytic, and anti-oxidative activities [59]. Combination therapy
for acne is more effective than azelaic acid monotherapy. Azelaic
acid’s most common side effects are skin redness, burning, difficulty
breathing, and itching. Azelaic acid is used to cure acne and treat 
other skin disorders, such as skin whitening and hyperpigmentation
[60].
e) Dapsone: Dapsone (diaminodiphenyl sulfone) has antibacterial and
anti-inflammatory properties, but its exact mode of action in treating
acne is still unknown. Recently, it has been proposed that dapsone’s
antimicrobial, immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties
may be responsible for treating mild to moderate acne [61]. Both
inflammatory and non-inflammatory acne lesions can be reduced
with dapsone gel (5 %). Because of its cheaper price, this agent is
more suitable for usage in developing nations. Nevertheless, it is not
advised as a first-line treatment for treating acne vulgaris [62,63].
3.2. Systemic treatment
As the microcomedo plays a crucial role in the growth of both inflammatory and non-inflammatory lesions, topical retinoids should be
considered as first-line therapy for treating acne. Oral systemic treatment is preferred when acne patients do not react to topical treatment or
if it appears as nodular lesions on the skin or with scars. Systemic
treatment is essential for acne patients to prevent social humiliation and
psychological embarrassment. Oral antibiotics, hormonal medicines,
and isotretinoin are the most used systemic treatments for treating acne
vulgaris [64].
3.2.1. Retinoids
Isotretinoin is a type of retinoid mostly preferred in systemic treatment, and it is also a vitamin A derivative. Formerly it was the only
medicine that could suppress acne over the long term and is used as a
first-line treatment for severe nodular or inflammatory acne. Patients
with mild to moderate acne who have previously failed to respond to
oral or topical medications may also find it helpful. It is also regarded as
a first-line treatment for severe acne on the face and trunk, acne that
leaves scars, and acne that leads to being psychologically ill [65].
Isotretinoin is the current only medicine available in the market that
shows an effect on all four pathogenic causes of acne [52,66]. It causes
sebaceous gland de-differentiation, which results in decreased sebum
production and a change in the cutaneous bacterial flora environment,
ultimately reducing the colonization of P. acnes in the hair follicles,
Keratinocytes are also shed as a result of this [67,68]. The duration of
isotretinoin therapy is typically administered over 16–24-week period.
Because of the adverse effects of isotretinoin, patients must be continuously monitored [69].
3.2.2. Antibiotics
Oral antibiotics are usually prescribed for acne that is moderate to
severe, inflammatory, resistant to previous topical treatments, or covers
a large body area [70,71]. Oral antibiotics like erythromycin, clindamycin, azithromycin, roxithromycin, fluoroquinolones (levofloxacin),
tetracyclines (doxycycline, minocycline, and lymecycline), and
co-trimoxazole are often used to treat acne [14,52].
These antimicrobial drugs suppress P. acnes growth and the development of inflammatory mediators produced by P. acnes. The capacity
of the antibiotic to reach the lipid environment of the pilosebaceous
follicles in the dermis, where P. acnes colonizes, determines the efficacy
of the treatment [72]. Tetracycline’s are widely used for treating acne
because they are effective, contain anti-inflammatory and antibacterial
properties and are economical. Doxycycline and minocycline are chosen
over tetracycline’s because they have anti-inflammatory properties,
cause less GI discomfort and are more lipid soluble, allowing them to
penetrate the pilosebaceous follicle more effectively [73]. There is no
sufficient data in the literature to prove that minocycline and doxycycline are more efficient than tetracycline’s. Furthermore, tetracyclines
have been associated with reduced resistance in P. acnes than macrolides [74].
The researchers haven’t conducted numerous studies to determine
the efficacy of azithromycin for treating acne. P. acnes levels are reduced
due to the minimal anti-inflammatory effects of erythromycin and
clindamycin [69]. In acne vulgaris treatment, frequently administering
these antibiotics for a long duration leads to increased resistance and
limited use of these agents. Nowadays, combinational treatment is
chosen for a better efficacy rate and to minimize resistance. Oral antibiotics are conjugated with topical agents like benzoyl peroxide or retinoids in treating acne, and the duration of treatment is limited to 12
weeks [14,75].
3.2.3. Hormonal treatment
In adult females and adolescents, hormonal treatment was chosen as
an alternative method for treating acne. Hormone therapy can be used to
treat the effect of androgen on sebaceous glands because sebaceous
glands are androgen-dependent [76]. Often, these hormones are delivered as oral contraceptive tablets. These contraceptive hormone pills
inhibit the sebum production that is first stimulated by testosterone. It
increases the production of sex hormone-binding globulin, which decreases the amount of physiologically active free testosterone in
women’s bodies [77].
Acne in women can be treated with oral contraceptive pills alone or
in conjugation with other treatments. Since the beneficial effects of
hormonal medicines are apparent only after a 3–6 month treatment
period, the most recommended treatment period for acne in females
with hormonal anti-androgens is at least 12 months, if not more [78].
Spironolactone is an androgen receptor blocker combined with oral
contraceptives to reduce inflammation caused by acne in females [14]. 

4. Recent advancements and commercial products
Recent scientific advances in the knowledge of acne’s complexity
have revealed new possibilities for study and development, such as
inhibiting the mechanistic pathway or process involved in acne formation. Receptors, cytokines, chemokines, and other proinflammatory
mediators were targeted in recent studies to control these pathways. In
addition, therapeutic components of nutrition, the skin microbiome, the
patient’s genetics, and follicle-dwelling bacteria play a crucial part in
acne therapy [79]. The use of medicines that release nitric oxide (NO) is
one of the novel strategies that have the potential to be fruitful in acne
management. NO has many functions, including highly effective
anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and antioxidant actions [80]. Isotretinoin (ISO) is a potent derivative of vitamin A used to treat acne. It has
the potential to achieve long-lasting remission of acne. However, it is
known to have side effects such as teratogenicity, skin reactions, ocular
reactions, changes in blood indicators, and occasional Acne Fulminans.
It is important to focus on minimising these side effects by considering
combination medication and adjusting the dosage. This will help
improve the treatment experience for patients [81]. Despite the significant increase in understanding of the causes of acne that have occurred
over the past 20 years, many efforts have been made to develop novel
therapy regimens specifically aimed at the elimination of acne. Some of
the ongoing or latest clinical trials data has shown in Table 1 (the data
obtained from ClinicalTrials.gov).
Researchers have conducted many studies on acne, but only a
handful of acne treatments have passed clinical testing and are now
available to consumers. The acne therapies currently available on the
market can be applied topically or systemically, but very few combine
the two methods. The following is a list of a few commercial products
(see Table 2) available worldwide.

5. Conclusions
Acne is a prevalent inflammatory skin condition that frequently
causes depression and social embarrassment, mostly in adults. The
aforementioned four key pathogenic factors are the causative aspects in
the development of acne; this pathological process provides researchers
clues to develop various therapeutics for acne management. In order to 
